= Minutes for 2020-11-12

Questions/comments/follow-up discussion welcome as always

== Logistics

We talked through the logistics discussed in the agenda email copied at the end
of these minutes.

Per discussion of those BoD passdowns, the changes that will go up for public
review first are:

* Added a custom encoding PTE bit for Sv39 and Sv48
* Describe the behavior of address-translation caches a little more explicitly
* Allowed for speculative updates of page table entry A bits
* Slightly relaxed the atomicity requirement for A and D bit updates
  performed by the implementation
* Added NAPOT translation contiguity support (Zsn) for Sv39 and Sv48

Discussion on the to-do list items included:

* Picking an extension name and letters for NAPOT PTEs
** The most likely candidate seems to be "Zsn", a subset of "S" for supervisor
** Then, later, "Zsa" for virtual attributes
* Figuring out how to make the existence and sizes of NAPOT PTEs
  discoverable
** Per mailing list discussion, we should both mandate traps on reserved PTE
   fields as a self-discovery mechanism, and also add NAPOT translation
   contiguity information to the mmu-type field in the device tree
* Our changes will merge into Privileged ISA 1.12 (currently a draft)
* Likely update Spike before freeze, then the formal model sometime after
* I started collecting test cases at this link:
  https://github.com/riscv/virtual-memory/blob/master/tests.adoc
  Please contribute any additions or corrections, and/or send them to me
  and I can help asciidoc-ify and incorporate them

Virtual address attributes will be the first topic of discussion as soon
as we push the above items through to public review, and that can itself
go up for public review as soon as it's ready.  Likewise for anything else
after that.  It's up to our judgment to decide how finely to divide things.

== Meeting Technical Discussion

=== Naming Clarifications

* Dan will go through and refine wording like "NAPOT address translation" into
  something a little more precise.  Feel free to leave comments on the PR
  to point out any wording or naming you think is unclear.

=== Normative Updates

* Dan will combine the C and V bits in the PTE into a table listing the four
  combinations as a single "field"
* There was somewhat of a consensus that for NAPOT translation contiguity,
  we will only allow the 64KiB option to start with, and we will use the
  encoding currently listed in the draft.  This gives us the most flexibility
  to add other sizes in the future, should consensus emerge to add them, while
  still reserving those bits for other possible uses as well.  Dan will add a
  table to commentary showing what those encodings would look like, so it's
  clearer what the intention is.  If there is consensus to add, say, 16KiB in
  the future, that should be able to happen as a fast track change.
* Related: future incarnations of Zsn that do have multiple options should
  allow for each architecturally-available option to be supported or not
  supported by a given implementation.  It will be up to profiles to decide
  which (if any) will be required, and which might be forbidden.
* Also related: the encodings not currently listed in Table 4.5 will be filled
  in and marked as reserved

=== Commentary Clarifications to Add

* <XLEN writes to the page table are strongly discouraged, as they could
  lead to the address-translation algorithm (page table walker) picking up a
  partially-incomplete translation
* There is no explicit restriction against placing page tables in
  non-idempotent memory.  We think there is no need to add normative wording
  to forbid this because the page table walker is only permitted to touch
  pages which are reachable by executing the address-translation algorithm, so
  it's under supervisor control.

== Other notes

* Externally, Linux developers are working on support for arbitrary
  power-of-two translation range support.  That would fit in nicely with our
  Zsn proposal, and might eventually be a great way to experiment with other
  intermediate NAPOT sizes and see how beneficial they might be

== Agenda email

....
Hi everyone,

Apologies in advance for a long email, but there are a lot of important
new logistics to cover.


First, our next meeting will be tomorrow, Nov 12, at 1PM PST.  Zoom info:
https://lists.riscv.org/g/tech-virt-mem/files/zoom_info.txt

Please note that most of the USA has shifted out of daylight saving time
since our last meeting, so please make sure to adjust accordingly if
needed.

The agenda will be to continue discussing our working draft, and the various
other issues that have come up on the mailing list recently.  I'll also cover
all of the information in this email.

Note that the next scheduled meeting on Nov 26 is the Thanksgiving holiday
in the USA, and so we will not have our usual meeting that day.


Second, I've moved our working draft from my personal github to here:
https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual/tree/virtual-memory
https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual/pull/611

I've also populated this new GitHub repo for the task group:
https://github.com/riscv/virtual-memory

Both of these are being done to shift us into compliance with the new
documentation and GitHub policies being drafted.

Our draft (also attached) has a few updates since last time, so please take
a look before tomorrow's meeting if you get a chance, and feel free to
comment on the PR if you have any questions or feedback, or see anything
I messed up.


Third, the RVI Board of Directors has requested that as a high-priority task
group, we should prioritize pushing everything that we have ready so far out
for public review by the end of the year.  Public review is associated with
the "frozen" state of a spec, where we promise not to make any more changes
unless public review uncovers some major flaw.  In other words, it gives
implementers a chance to start building it, writing the OS code to support
it, etc., knowing that the spec hopefully won't be changing underneath of
them at that point.

This will require us to do a couple of things:

1) Pick which features make the cut for this round of review.  Given the
timeline, I'd say the list is essentially what's currently in our working
draft, not including virtual attributes, since we won't really have time
to discuss that properly before the end of the year (I'm guessing).

Any features that don't make the cut this time can still go out for review
as soon as they're ready next year.  This is not a hard cliff for getting
features developed; just a desire to make forward progress on the features
that are closer to being ready.

2) Finish the list of items associated with "frozen" in the "Done" policy:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UL6F6ahNwFO69fecLJtnpZatx_PkS-Gdcvb8DdWhWUk
This includes:

* Picking an extension name and letters for NAPOT PTEs
* Figuring out how to make the existence and sizes of NAPOT PTEs
  discoverable
* Decide to stick with draft Priv ISA 1.12, or bump the revision number
* Come up with a set of test cases
  * Possibly informally, since I don't know that the compliance TG
    currently support test cases requiring concurrency, but Allen
    can correct me if I'm wrong :)
* Update the formal model and/or Spike (at least one)
* Anything else I'm missing?

Beyond "frozen", there are more tasks to be completed before ratification.
Most notably, we'd need at least one and preferably more than one
HW + SW proof of concept (running on Si, FPGA, QEMU, etc.), to convince
ourselves and others that the idea is indeed fully viable.  We don't
have to worry about that now.


So that's our roadmap for the next couple of months.  Feel free to
respond with any questions.  Talk to you all tomorrow.

Dan
....
